Methodology
--------------
A.Data Collection
The data collection for this project includes a dataset consisting of high-level features, such as batting teams, bowling teams, runs per over, wickets fallen, and run rate, taken from Kaggle, and the official IPL had its database for records. This dataset is further divided into training and testing datasets, which are used to enhance the accuracy of the model. This dataset consists of almost 2 lakh records, which have data from IPL 2008 to 2023. By using this dataset, we can find many patterns in IPL and many combinations of predicting scores and train the model accurately. The dataset consists of a lot of qualitative data, so we used some preprocessing techniques on the data to handle duplicate records, handle missing values, and make qualitative data easy to handle by encoding it using label encoders and one-hot encoders. The total runs scored is the target variable in the dataset.
--------------------------------------------
B.Architecture
LSTM networks are a special type of RNN (recurrent neural networks), which do not have the drawbacks and limitations of RNN. LSTM is a very suitable neural network to work on forecasting data. IPL is a cricket game that has time series data of getting runs in 20 overs. LSTM uses forget gates, which are used to remember long-term relationships and are able to find the patterns in cricket. It has the ability to remember and forget information on its own decision. LSTM takes a sequence of features to train the neural network, which helps to remember relations and their trends in LSTM cells. This cell holds information and makes decisions based on the information and the patterns it knows. This architecture is very effective during the match to predict the overall score in the innings that will be scored by the team. In this architecture, we used to train the employees using BPTT (Backpropagation Through Time ) to update the network weights to be minimized and used the Adam optimizer to speed up convergence and MSE (Mean Square Error) to minimize the prediction errors. Hyperparameter tuning is using to match the parameters of the training data to train the model more optimally and get more accuracy. Using dropout layers to avoid overfitting and 2 LSTM layers and 2 dense layers for an accurate prediction of the score while the match is in the progress.

   By comparing it with the traditional ML models used to predict the IPL score, this neural network approach is used to find the hidden patterns and make the network learn them. It dynamically adjusts to the match scenarios, making them very useful for real-time score forecasting. Actually, the IPL game is a complex game that has internal and external factors that affect the score, but we use parameters such as run rate, current score, strike rate, venue, and team performance to train the data and make a model to learn the patterns. By that, it can be able to adapt to the dynamic changes and predict the appropriate score, and it will be inversely transformed and then can be shown by this application.
------------------------------------------------
C.Algorithms Used
LSTM neural networks are used in the applications of forecasting real-time data, as IPL score is a forecasting data. So LSTM is very appropriate to be used for this project. Compared with traditional RNN , LSTM has the forget , input, and output gates, which are very helpful to preserve the important data across the several overs without losing the important factors information that affects the score. Runs and wickets in the progressing overs of the match, with other factors or features affecting the score, are very precise for prediction. The algorithm used in the architecture of the model includes the ELT process for analysis, encoding of qualitative data, and neural network building using sequential features, which consists of 2 LSTM layers, 2 dropout layers, and a dense layer as the output layer. The activation functions we used were ReLU and tanh for different LSTM layers in the network. The Ada optimizer is used to tune the model and trained with backpropagation on time (BPTT). By precise simulation of match trajectories, LSTMs do more accurately than traditional models like linear regression and decision trees and thus can be a powerful tool for IPL score prediction.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
D.Model Training
To train the model using an LSTM neural network with this dataset, divide it into 70% for training, 15% for evaluating, and 15% for testing. This 70% training set allows the model to find the hidden patterns, and the network will remember the patterns, which is the learning path of the network to get trained. Hyperparameter tuning is done to find the best-fitting model and optimal weights suited to be given to the input layer. This tuning of the hyperparameters helps to prevent the overfitting of the model and get the best version of the model. The input features include current runs scored at the time of this ball, current wickets, venue, bowling team, batting team , bowler name, batsman name, and last 5 overs runs and wickets to be fitted in the input layer with appropriate weights. Sequential implementation of the model matches data with LSTM layers, thereby enabling long-term dependencies and aligning progress trends efficiently.
----------------------------------------------------------------------
1) Hyperparameter Tuning
To get optimal and accurate performance , hyperparameter tuning was very essential for the LSTM model. To increase accuracy and avoid overfitting, it was optimized by the critical parameters, learning rate, activation functions, and dropout rate while training the model. The main aim of hyperparameter tuning is to optimize the performance of the model by finely tuning the parameters of the model. To determine optimal parameters, we have used methods like Grid Search and Random Search and provided a batch size of 4 to find the best-fit parameters for the model. The best practices used to train this model are early stopping and adaptive learning rate scheduling, which help at the time of training. The dropout layers and batch normalization are utilized for improvement of the model's generalization ability. By using this model can find the best set of parameters to train the model.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2) Performance Analysis  of LSTM model
As compared with the traditional ML models like linear regression and decision trees, the efficiency and performance will be more. Using sequential data as time series data, the LSTM model performs well to identify patterns in the IPL data. Predicting IPL scores involves a lot of computation and analysis of numerous variables that create patterns in the final score. Graphical visualization, such as confusion matrices, precision-recall plots, and scatter plots, offered more guidance to the functioning of the model by offering information, and that helps to optimize the model. To identify long-term relationships, the LSTM model will identify those trends and patterns and retain them for a while. The model interpretability technique that determines which parameters are most responsible for the final score projections is known as feature importance analysis. It forecasts the score by monitoring all of those significant characteristics and variables. ML models will find the combinations or probabilities of those input features or instances and give the target variable, but the LSTM model identifies all types of hidden trends and predicts the score.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
3)Performance Metrics
The equations below were used to identify and evaluate the model performance:
1.Mean Squared Error (MSE): It estimates the average of the squared differences between predicted and actual values. Lower is better.
2.Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE): Gives a more understandable measure by squaring the MSE and then taking its square root, thus rendering it comparable to the original data scale.
3.Mean Absolute Error (MAE): It calculates the mean of the of abolute differnces between actual values and predicted values given by the model.
